you want to
record good all right thank you
everybody uh this is the uh actually
we're going to run two sequential
meetings tonight for all intens and
purposes is for the you basically uh
procedural reasons uh we have uh
importantly we have the town budget
public hearing uh which we have the
opportunity to uh receive comments from
the public on the budget and get any
input that uh public would like to
share and then we will uh move on after
we'll adjourn that meeting and move on
to our regular uh Board of Finance uh
meeting where we conduct our normal
business and
agenda okay so I'll go ahead and call
the public budget public hearing to
order um we will recite the pledge of
allegiance to start I pledge allegiance
to the flag of the United States of
America and to the Republic for which it
stands one nation okay indivisible with
liberty and justice for
all thank you um what I thought we would
do um is you know make a few comments or
actually highlight some of the things in
the budget I don't know if um you know
we want to take a lot of time doing that
but I thought it might be of value to
just kind of go over that and preempt
some of the questions that might happen
and point out some of the things I think
it would make sense for for the public
to be aware of if you're not already uh
Eric can you give me the opportunity to
share my screen uh you should have it
now okay tell me if you don't let me
yeah I do it
okay okay so I'm going to go through
this pretty quickly um the real
opportunity to kind of participate or
listen in on the uh budget explanations
in the board of selectman meetings as
they prepare and also of course hand
over Elementary school and the Ram uh
budgets those are major portions of our
budget it's divided into six I'm sorry
three main uh uh expenditure sections if
you will the uh Ram uh education budget
is one it's voted on independently and
developed independently of the town uh
but it is part of our of our town uh
expenditures and budget um the AES uh
district school district budget is
another major uh portion of our town
expenditures and budget and then of
course we have the town expenditures so
everything needed to run the town so
those are the three main areas uh that
make up the uh the expenditures and
Taxation requirements for the town of
Andover um this is where we are now at
this uh draft budget this is a draft it
has not been uh accepted or voted on uh
in full uh by the
uh Board of Finance uh but will be and
we'll and hopefully as we have a faired
proposed budget we'll pre present that
at the Town budget meeting okay so the
way this uh budget rolls up we have a
column J here if you see this this is
our proposed budget for 2024
2025 and you can see in column K it's
the percent increase over the uh current
budget uh so you'll see some
differentials there I'm just going to
hit the highlights I am going to talk a
little bit about just point out the
areas that are major areas of
change um and the things that we're
mostly interested in and then we'll talk
about a little bit about the mill rate
as it currently stands okay um as you
can see the tax proposed tax increase to
meet the proposed budget is as
implemented there it's not a large
change but it's about $10 million it's
about
1.1% okay
um so moving down we have a lot of areas
of Revenue we have prior years taxes
leans taxes interest uh personal
property taxes we have several state
grants that are listed here uh we have a
a big uh slug of revenue from the ECS
that's educational cost sharing funds
that come in from the state um couple
other uh grants from the
state um some anticipated some are new
um um rental fees town clerk's fees
these are permits and things that come
in for work that's being done around the
town transfer station fees waste
Redemption
Etc um Allin um there is a revenue aside
from taxation of about $2.7
million uh so um that shows just a large
reduction you can ignore those numbers
because the way the spreadsheet set up
until the maill rates finalize uh we
don't really have we don't include the
10 million in taxation because taxation
is strictly based on the expenditures
minus you know the mill rate so we don't
actually add it in this uh but the main
thing is that uh you can see it's it's
you know most of these line items are
pretty much line on line there isn't a
lot of differences in the the amounts
there um couple things of note um
highlighted here in green the ram budget
uh we got kind of a bonus this year uh
because the percentage of the students
in Handover that make up the ram student
population is lower um we actually have
a reduction in our costs from last year
for the ram budget uh so that helps us
out quite a bit and allows us to keep uh
offset quite a bit of our expenditures
and needs so that was a nice
bonus the AES budget right below it um
they're proposing a budget of $4.3
million roughly that's about a 2.6%
increase over um or
2.7% over uh over last year there's a
miscalculation here I'm just going to
hide this col
so uh so it's a modest increase from the
AES and as most of you probably know
that budget is developed separate from
the board of finances developed by the
uh by the superintendent The District in
concert with the Board of Education and
they held many workshops earlier this
year uh in developing their budget okay
and then we have detail below here we
have a lot of the towned uh expenditures
detailed uh basically Department by
Department line by line again I'm not
going to go through them um but I will
highlight some of the the major changes
just so people can see where you know
the impact is really this year compared
to Prior years uh we can certainly make
this available to you if you would like
to see this um the main one I think to
look at first here is the community
center so as everyone's aware we have a
new community center uh that's being
built and having it up and built is
great but we also have to fund the
activities there so there's a
significant amount of expenditures that
the board of Selectmen have requested uh
to fund uh to make that Community Center
operational and some of these some of
these uh expenses do a little bit of
offset to some other work that's going
on in different areas of the budget you
know for see the Town Clerk and
Recreation Commission are doing really
should be part of the community uh
Center
budget as you can see uh all of these
area all of these are new you see no
expenditures for prior years uh so
there's a total additional expenditure
of about
$73,000 the bulk of that is for wages
for the director who we anticipate uh
and the selectman Really anticipate the
this director position would be taking
out a lot of the activities associated
with the rec department at all because
we're kind of getting done on an ad hoc
basis and uh it makes sense to have the
community center director help organize
and manage some of that stuff you know
the rest is for things like maintenance
and software and you know phone internet
Etc um and Equipment janitorial okay so
that's an add a significant addition to
the town's budget this year to take
advantage of the new community
center um we have a pretty big jump here
in our health and dental insurance uh
you can see I've highlighted that it's
about a 40% increase so there's about
you know it's about
another was it's about another
$70,000 uh increase over last year
that's just the cost of of our health
and dental insurance for the town
employes okay scrolling
down couple other things to note mostly
down in the fun area I believe yeah so
down in this area is where some of the
capital funds are uh managed and uh
budgeted for so we've got a couple
differentials that I think are worth
pointing out uh that the board of
finance and the board of selectman have
been taking a close look at uh one is
the multi-use building uh we still have
some work that needs to be done not all
not everything's really being done uh in
terms of setting that uh community up uh
in the multi-use building uh for
everything that it's going to need we
haven't finished it we haven't fully
furnished it so there's there's really
to make it take take advantage of that
uh building we need to uh do some
additional work and and add some uh
Furniture fixtures
Etc there's also a significant increase
about $75,000 in the bridge and Culver
fund um anybody who's been in any of the
Town meetings has heard aarch talk quite
bit about this um we are just woful
underfunded and our bridges and culber
for the work that's going to need to be
done um we will hopefully get some state
and federal help here and there but it
there's still a significant commitment
on the part of the Town that's got to
happen we have also set up a capital
fund for the end over Elementary School
this is new hasn't been funded in the
past but the reality is that we need a
capital expenditure fund for the AES
school we do not have have any mechanism
currently uh significantly in place to
fund Capital Improvements to the school
and this is become a real issue we've
got some parking lot uh problems we've
got some uh other infrastructure
problems that really need to be dealt
with at AES and and we're behind on
these as much as we are on some of the
others so uh we need to take a hard look
at
that um and then we also have an open
space fund that has been uh newly funded
this year to tune of about
$50,000 and what this gives us an
opportunity to do is be prepared should
some opportunities arise where the town
may be able to acquire open space uh if
uh such were to come up for sale um
we've missed some opportunities in the
past potentially because we did not uh
have any such fund or the resources uh
to take action on some real things that
might have been a real bargain to in
terms of securing uh some open space uh
for the town so that's uh that's what
that's all
about and that's really it the total
budget excluding education there's about
$4 million $4.3 million one more there
um that you can see at the bottom of the
screen it is a significant increase for
the town expenditures about 16% again
most of that driven by the new funds and
these increases to the existing funds is
the Bridget Culver fund that we really
feel is necessary at this
point again we haven't voted on this as
a board but I think uh we're coming to
agreement so I don't want to misstate it
this isn't the vyl proposed budget but
we will be voting and presenting on
something probably very similar to
this I'm going to flip over to the mill
rate calculations where uh does show our
total expenditures you can see here it's
about $ 122.8 million all
in uh total estimated Revenue again for
permits fees Grant Suess about
2.7 um we've got
$150,000 proposed use out of the fund
balance this is our reserves uh to help
offset some of these new
expenditures um about 30,000 exemptions
of batement that's nothing particularly
different than what we had
before and this would calculate a total
to be raised by taxes of about $10
million okay
uh the grand list is here this is the
value of all the personal property in
town
estimated and so that calculates to a
mill rate uh per Mill is about
,45 we calculate that out to an
estimated mill rate uh for taxation
purposes of 31.4659
basically how the taxation breaks out um
when we when we look at it that doesn't
mean that somebody's taxes are going to
increase by 0
55% uh it really depends on where the
house your cars Etc are assessed so that
is but that does show a slight increase
in the midd r okay we were at 31 31 31.2
n and it's at
31.4659 Etc the total by taxation will
go up about
1.1% uh so not bad overall fortunately
again because some of the offsets from
the reduction in the ram budget were
able to uh significantly reduce the
impact of the Town even with the
increase to the town expenditures
so okay um that being said I think I
will uh go ahead and open it up to
public comment uh Eric do you want to go
around to the uh to the board as you see
it and offer to accept public
comment certainly okay first up on my
screen uh is Linda fish I'm all set just
listening okay second up uh
Kathleen can we go to thank you can we
go to the new community room in your
budget sheets mark
you're on mute
again sure I was trying to share and I
couldn't get to my mute button either
that's right let me see sure I'm on the
right one
here just like work I have too many
spreadsheets open
sometimes all
right right here
yes um so let's see well first thing in
column m one two three four fifth line
down it should be annual maintenance
just want to correct that but I don't
see heat in
here is that part of where is the heat
for this building oh you have
electricity 8,000 how how are we heating
this new building with these
splits yes this H this building is uh
completely uh heated with duct ductless
split heat pumps so the electricity
costs should absorb that okay all right
and um the Conneticut partnership for
Health Plan Eric we still haven't so
Connecticut partnership offers the
health plan for municipalities it's uh
part of the state of Connecticut they
look at your health cost and kind of
spreadsheet them just wondering if we've
ever we talked about that eons ago has
that ever been looked at nope not by me
okay I'd recommend that to the board uh
you know to keep these 40% your health
costs are going up left and right state
of Connecticut has a plan to help small
towns with this rising cost I know it's
not good for this budget but something
some should look at and then the other
point I wanted to make is last night we
were told that 130,000 has been set
aside for this new community room for
what I understood were kitchen cabinets
and things that we needed which I
understand so my question is why are we
adding another 50,000 in this budget if
we have
130 elsewhere or do we need do we need
all of this money for this new building
that's my
question so I can answer that question
and and the first answer is we don't
need any additional money for this
building um but right now the multi-use
building fund given the commitments that
we've made at this point is basically
fully
expended so what that does is uh allows
us to begin keeping money into a pool
that can actually deal with things you
know uh major Acquisitions things like
that um so yeah there's nothing
initially in this budget that would
require us to fund
that but it allows us to have that leway
if something comes up on a grant or
something like that that requires Town
contribution without us going back to
fund balance you still have to go to a
town meeting to approve it but at least
it's already a budgeted fund if that
answers your
question yes thank you that's all I
have okay thank you
Kathleen Eric what do we have next
well sorry I
just it's hard for me to tell since
we're in Sharing
mode I can stop to share got it thanks
okay next up in
cre hi oh no we're just here to listen
and learn and understand tonight thank
you thank you okay thank you an uh next
up Shannon
um thank you very much and thank you to
whoever was uh correcting those typos in
in real time so I don't have to point
them out like English major awesome
terrific thank you Mark um thank you
Board of Finance for all of your work um
I just really appreciate and I know the
significant amount of time there's no
salary in here for you and I greatly
appreciate all your work the only thing
I wanted to comment on having reviewed
all the budget
um and I'm sorry I was late getting in
maybe you described it Mark um I
understand I saw the the um reasoning
for a
$50,000 but uh salar budget for somebody
for the compu uh Community Center
manager or whatnot um I just think given
the status of the community center and
the comparison of that salary to for
example our town clerk salary um it
seems
quite High um especially because I don't
know how much really is going to be done
in this coming year to manage um that
property so that's my only comment and
if you commented on it before Mark I
apologize I had difficulty getting into
the meeting thanks very
much yeah thanks we really hadn't
commented other than to point out the uh
the
expenditures s is New Y Mark I just I
just wanted to mention last week Shannon
wasn't present we did have a discussion
last week at our meeting um and we did
cut it 10,000 up to this point there was
discussion of possibly cutting it a
little bit more not knowing um relieving
it with the fact that it could be a
full-time person now but Eric has
expressed that it might turn into a
part-time person so we did cut it once
already I'm I'm wondering Eric ER I
wonder if Eric would be kind enough to
explain um the role a little bit for for
for the sake of everybody that's on the
call that doesn't know Eric you've
talked about you know like three or four
different jobs that would all be rolled
into one maybe you could share that for
Shannon and anybody else that might be
interested
sure I what I proposed to the board of
Selectmen uh which they put forward was
to essentially combine the position
of Senior Center Director
Community Center Director and Rec Center
Director or Recreation director and
combine them all and throw them into one
person but make that kind of a director
level person so that that person is also
responsible for grant writing and
dealing with their own budget and
administrating or and administering the
building um and what goes on in it um
that's a big role um I to be be
perfectly honest what I was going to try
to do is pin is poach another
experienced senior or Community Center
Director um because I think
getting a reasonable amount of programs
up and running and doing it fairly
quickly for the community is a big ask
and I also realize that there's a lot of
money that we're leaving on the table
that the state has and various
organizations have for senior issues
that we're not really capturing because
we don't have the bandwidth to do it so
that was my goal in that position um was
to be able to fund a single person
initially that could adopt all three
roles and manage all three roles
including uses of the field um you know
and uses that occur in the gymnasium Etc
that person would essentially have three
uh you know volunteer committees that
report to them one Senior Center focused
one Community Center focused and then
the existing wreck
commission uh you know would basically
be be calling the shots but that person
would be involved in doing the actual
scheduling um and dealing with fields
and things of that nature so that's what
I envisioned and that's what the board
of Selectmen kind of agreed to um you
know but how it actually shakes out is
going to depend somewhat on who we can
hire for that
position thank you
Eric so I have a question about that
Eric have you researched or reviewed
because you said poaching from another
town I mean is this what in another town
a director does all of these functions
for
$50,000 Plus benefits I mean is this are
we capable of getting somebody to do all
of that for 50,000
honestly
no but that's the budget I was given so
that's where we're going with
it
um uh next person is on a phone a phone
ending in
5475 uh you'll have to unmute yourself I
can't unmute you are
Un Hi this is Leanne Hutchinson um I
might wait till the end if you have
public speak again at the end to speak
about the community center but I guess
I'll wait until then
thanks uh well as far as the budget
hearing this is the only public speak so
if you want it as part of the budget
hearing process now's your
shop oh okay thank you I didn't um
listen I didn't look at the agenda I
just um wanted to I just signed in um
after you had already begun anyway um I
guess I my comment isn't fully finalized
which is one reason I was going to wait
till the end but apparently there's no
such thing anyway um I'm about halfway
through listening to the board of
Finance meeting from last week I I guess
it's the most recent one where there was
a lot of discussion about this and I
signed in now just in time to hear a
couple of your comments um from Eric and
Kathy Etc um I I think a lot of it from
what I listened to at the board of
Finance meeting last week seems to to me
hinge on whether or not it's full-time
or part-time and as you know you had a
lot of discussion about comparing this
to the salary for the Town Clerk and I I
kind of understand why you would want to
do that but I at the same time I think
this is a completely different job so
again I keep coming back to what I've
listened so far as to whether or not
this person is full-time or part-time
but from the remarks that Eric just made
about
essentially um having three
different almost three different job
titles in one and having several
committees report to them and wanting
someone to do grant writing um I think
that you should be try to be comfortable
looking on the higher end of the figures
that have been discussed because um I
just I think it's a big job I'm not
going to look for it now but there's
East Hampton is looking for a full-time
person for their senior center and it
was advertised in the River East and I
don't remember the South but it was
again a full-time position but I think
it was at least 50,000 and I'll correct
myself at another time if that's not
right thank
you so did you say
Colombia uh East I meant to say East
Hampton if I didn't okay I one of the
ones I was actually kind of hoping to
poach uh just got poached by another
town um that was paying way more than
we're willing to offer um but that's
beside the
point okay that appears to be
everybody there you got J
Larson oh right
yeah unless I'm missing somebody Jed
lson Jed oh sorry my apologies Jed and I
actually had comments
tonight but you know first uh you know
thanks for a really good job on at least
the budget from my point of view when I
read the River East I see there's other
towns that are wrestling with 8 to 9%
increases and so when this came out to
what was less than you know $100
increase for me on the mill rate I said
wow that's uh that's pretty good so
thank you for the good job on that the
uh one of the things that you had
highlighted in the budget that I didn't
understand is you know the fire
commission had a pretty big number
associated with it and I didn't know
what the Fire Commission
did you know I thought it was a group of
guys who voted on whether or not we were
going to buy this and that uh so obvious
I didn't know how the fire Commissioners
could spend that kind of money so there
has to be something I'm
missing I can take that one Mark if you
want yeah go ahead please Eric so the
way it works is that the town of Andover
has a volunteer Fire
Organization um that is their own
organization so the town owns the
building and the town supplies most of
their operating expenses Through the
Fire Commission the board of fire
commission's budget is the budget to run
uh and manage the fire department for
the town of Amy
okay thank you yeah next question you
know shared the comment uh about the
$50,000 increase in the multi-use
building
fund and my comment was going to be to
the fact that I was surprised at last
night's meeting we talked about all the
different things that were going to be
done from the multi-use building
fund and I'm thinking tonight well at
least last night I thought that was the
fund to build the community Senior
Center and that was the multi-use
building maybe that's not exactly true
and there's other multi-use buildings in
that group that uh I wasn't
understanding but if it was just for
that and we were talking last night
about all the different things we were
going to use that money for my my
concern was we shouldn't be putting
50,000 into that we should be
identifying what the use was actually
going to be but maybe that maybe that
fund is more than just the community
Senior
Center so that fund was
initially so that fund came into
existence before I was the Town
Administrator and it was funded over a
number of years um and it was designed
to be just uh what it says which is a
multi-purpose building fund but the
first and and biggest priority for that
fund was the construction of a future
Senior Community
Center um and that fund would have been
continued to be used exclusively for
that had not the pandemic hit and then
the town had the opportunity to direct
uh arpa funds um to get the initial bill
build of the community center done so
that left uh a fund that was initially
around I don't know
$475,000 we did spend the initial
engineering and design work out of that
fund but we funded the actual
construction with arpa funding or arpa
funds um so that has left money there um
and then now twice
at uh well actually three times once
last year during the budget process uh
the board of Finance as part of last
year's budget process uh pushed to the
residents that they would be spending
$150,000 of that money um to complete
the senior center um above and beyond
what the arpa money is um subsequent to
when we can do it without paying
prevailing wage
and then additionally at a meeting we in
2022 the town by town meeting
appropriated
$75,000 of that to build the senior
Transportation uh garage so that project
is still slowly in the works um but that
was also allocated to come out of the
multi-use building fund
um and then uh at last night's meeting
um you know at a town meeting we agreed
to take an additional sum out to uh
assist with the town's portion uh of the
match for the Steep brand so that's the
status of it so far um I think it's a
valuable fund for the town to have and
the reason is I think you don't want to
be dipping into fund balance
every time you propose a project that
requires a town
match um so that's that's where I think
it's
going okay I certainly don't have a have
any issues with with what the money's
going for it just it when we were
talking about the Steep Grant building
the you know the direct fields and that
I had a hard time tying that into the
multi-use building fund and and being
able to see in the budget you know what
it is the money is actually being used
for that brings me you know to the next
comment I had and uh in one I was
pleased to see the you know $50,000 for
open space
funding in the budget and it talks about
going into the open space
fund and I am not aware of how I might
see what
what the balances are in all these
different funds that we have so if
somebody were to ask me well how much is
in the open space fund now you know i'
go back to the last time that
we tried to buy a pie of open space and
I knew what it was then I don't think we
spent any so it's probably the same but
we've got all this money we're
transferring into the uh various funds
and it might be nice to see
somehow how much in each of those
funds dad I don't want to interrupt you
but we as the board of Finance asked
that exact question at the beginning of
our sessions this year as well since
since we are putting away you
know money each year you know and I said
the same thing I need to you know since
we're asking for a big spending increase
this year and putting it in all
different places it would make me feel
better if we had the balances so we
provided that um okay I don't have it in
front of me now but I think some of the
money you were referring to too with the
multi-use building fund there was
already an accumulation of money there
and then Eric would earmark what each
thing was going to um I don't I have um
another comment that I want to make
towards what some of the speakers were
saying but I don't want to interrupt
your um you know the questions ongoing
because this is your time okay
yeah thank you
um I guess last thing I would mention
just for consideration when we go to the
town meeting you know we've always had
the board of Selectmen and board of
Finance up front and we might consider
putting the Board of Education up there
as well because even though the board of
education budget is only one line in the
board of finance
budget it seems like there's always at
least half the questions that are coming
up pertain to the board of education
budget and having them up there they're
you know
still they have a bigger line item than
in the budget than the town budget
currently has and so uh having them
accessible to answer the questions right
up front with everybody else
that that's something to consider I
guess I would just put it that way but I
think that was all the the comments and
questions I had and again thanks for all
the hard work on the
budget looks good to
me thanks J to answer your question
currently in the open space fund there's
$233,900
34 as of the last time I got the numbers
from the treasure okay and that's
certainly very close to what we reported
a couple years ago when we were trying
to buy that piece of property so I
guess that's good thank you
Eric y thanks D Joan go ahead I just
wanted to because a lot of people had
interest and I appreciate it we did talk
extensively last week about a lot of
topics but since people had brought up
the um the position of the director the
community Senior Center Director what we
have to remember too is that we tend to
do a lot of comparisons when we talk
salaries and I make suggestions I
definitely do a lot of research with
area towns and see what the ongoing
things are going you know we've had
things sent to us the other thing we
really need to remember and that it's
it's hard for me when we're bringing
this up is that I believe Andover has
about 3,000 residents maybe
3,300 so it's really hard to compare the
amount of work I don't mean the position
the Prestige everything that but the
amount the sheer volume of work like
lean had said this is going to be busy
busy you know if we compared it to even
a centry or something you know a $10,000
a 10,000 person Town we're not going to
have the senior citizens that need the
amount of rides say or whatever is going
to be there so we try to balance that
when we're selecting things that we
really have to consider the volume too I
mean the job is important we think we we
left it at a nice salary point because
we really it's up to the board of
selectman and Eric as The Town manager
to decide how many hours fulltime would
be so in my opinion I think someone
looking for a job might be able to come
in for that I mean you don't know until
you try and then then you you know make
some corrections or if you're not
finding the proper candidates then you
maybe make some adjust ments with that
so it's you know we're just not a big
town so the amount of work like when I
went from an 800 student school to a 200
student school 20 teachers versus maybe
80 teachers as an administrative
assistant I'll just tell you the amount
of work I had at the bigger place was a
ton more you know just trying to factor
in the size of our town with what we try
to bring
forward whether it matters but we were
talking a lot about this position last
week so I think it's fair since it's a a
a topic of you know
discussion y okay good um we have any
other comments from any of the board of
Finance
members and I guess I'll go ahead and
say if anybody in the public has
anything addition they'll they would
like to add we'll give you one last
chance before we turn
thanks Mark this is Shannon again I just
had one question and again I'm sorry if
you covered it when you were previously
talking about it um in the town
administrator's office lines it showed
$155,000 for a project manager I didn't
know if that was adding to Eric's salary
to manage a project if that was a
separate position and I also noted that
the administrative assistant had a
significant drop in income so maybe
that's where that was I just was curious
about that that specific um area yeah
unfortunately for Eric it's not an
addition to his okay but unfortunately
for him it is a position he's trying to
find go ahead Eric do you want to kind
of explain the rationale there sure so
uh as many of you know my previous
Administrative
Assistant uh took the position of the
tax collector in the town of Andover um
and I sat on that position and kept it
open um for six months and basically
asked her to see whether she could fill
in and then looked and saw how much of
the load she could handle at the same
time she was the tax collector um
now bear in mind that there are the the
goal on my part in having an
administrative assistant is to take some
of the workload off me
and there's some things I'm really
particularly terrible about like
updating the website social media you
know things of that nature um so the
question
became was it could we do could we
better spend the money by getting me the
support where I need it the most which
frankly is project management um because
right now we have open somewhere around
13 million in Grant fund
dollars um that are coming into the town
and there's one of me to manage all
those dollars um and that's a lot so I
decided I would be I would rather give
up an administrative assistant and have
some of the functions covered by the tax
collector you know and just give the tax
collector a stipend to make up for the
extra work um and
partially fund a project manager a very
part-time project manager now some
grants and some projects the project
manager can be wrapped into the cost of
the grant um but in other things it
can't so so that's basically where where
I'm coming at it um it's where I need
the assistance the most to keep the
projects that are going going
well I'd like to thank the board of uh
Finance for all their hard work I know
this is uh a tough always a tough budget
to put together because there's so many
needs and everybody coming at you I do
think the
senior uh Personnel person the director
is going to be your Sticky Wicket to get
this budget passed um so I think uh
having uh the job
description uh which you just went over
Eric as the Director of you know senior
uh community room and wreck spelt out
for people it might help with that
because you know it's new positions that
end up always becoming a problem in the
budget because people that are working
aren't making this money it's that's
always a problem in town the 40 years
we've been here so um but I support the
budget I think it's a good budget and uh
I think it's going to move us forward um
which is you know what what we need to
do in the town with the community center
and all the projects moving forward so
thank you very much okay thank you
Kathleen but any final comments from
anybody else who hasn't had a chance to
add their second round
okay hearing none I guess I would call
for a board member to make a motion to
adjourn I'll make a motion to journ the
public make motion to adjourn any second
I'll second it okay thank you Louise we
have a motion to adjourn the budget
public hearing any
discussion all right hearing none we'll
take a vote all those in favor on the
board say I I I any
opposed any
extensions all right hearing none the uh
the 2024 uh budget public hearing is
adjourned thank you very much for your
participation everybody some good
questions I hope you found this helpful
um we will go ahead and roll into our
regular meeting and anybody who wishes
to stay of course you're more than
welcome uh just another public meeting
probably a lot less interesting but I'll
leave that up to
you okay do anybody need to have a short
break before we roll into our
meeting okay your opportunity has passed
I'm going to call the regular uh meeting
to order uh this is the town of Andover
Board of Finance regular meeting for
Wednesday April 24th uh again we'll call
this to order and recite the Pledge of
Allegiance I pledge allegiance to the
flag in the United States of America and
to the Republic
which Justice for all thank you okay
once again we have an opportunity for
public speak uh for the regular
meeting anybody has any
input do you want me to go around the
room again I'm just going to say unmute
yourself and you know let us know
because most of the folks here have
already had a chance to speak on the
budget so the my guess is we probably
won't have
anybody okay hearing none we'll go ahead
and move on then to uh agenda item
number three which is the changes and
additions to the agenda does anybody
have any changes or additions to the
agenda Joan I Mark um I just want to
make mention of I know you weren't at
the last meeting but we had hoped to
have Cheryl here tonight at the meeting
um I did reach out to her and it's no
fault of her own I don't know if she
received you know yeah I CAU yeah I
caught the email she said I wanted to
include you in the email um so I don't
know on Eric's agenda if the new
business is the treasurer actually
talking to us or if there's something
else he's going to talk about with the
treasure but um I know that what we had
talk sorry I don't know if I'm allowed
to say this in this part of the meeting
but we were just going to ask her a
couple questions and of her advice
moving forward with um nothing about her
particular position we all stated last
week how happy we are with her we're so
excited that she came in and cleaned up
things so she's just going to give us
kind of an overview so I will continue
to contact her and then report back to
the board and then whenever we want to
put it on a meeting agenda we can do
that Eric to see so Joan do you want to
move to strike that item thank you for
procedure these are the things I need to
know so I would like to move to take off
item five um letter A the treasurer's
you know appearance at our meeting okay
we have a
second he for discussion Bill okay uh
any discussion Eric do you have any
concerns over us passing on that this
week no yeah it was just to talk to show
okay any discussion from the board
members all right hearing none we'll
have a vote all those in favor say I I I
I any
abstentions that's nice bill I didn't do
that I don't know how that happened I
have no idea how that actually you still
only get one
vote are any opposed to the
motion okay hearing none motion passes
we'll strike agenda 5A which is the new
business Treasurer okay any other
changes or additions to the
agenda okay I guess we we'll move on to
our old business so item 4A is to review
the policy for AES Capital
expenditures um we have any discussion
on
that motions
action no that would be Rob's Bailey
Wick as far as I understand yeah he's
going to follow up and I think uh you
know I'm I'm guessing Joan you probably
let the board know we had some a meeting
and talk a little bit about the school
and providing some information not
really relevant to this particular
topic though right yeah I was just going
to mention that later in kind of an
overview that I had planned um yeah I
would also say Mark you do have Shannon
Lowden on the call um if the board had
particular questions about that she
might be able to answer that since Rob
is not here yeah I know personally I
haven't reviewed it for a while so I
even been the top of my head but I don't
know Shannon if you have anything to add
for that or if you and Rob still are
planning to get together and kind of
iron out the details there uh Rob and I
have met a number of times we've got a
draft um and we're just finalizing the
final parts of it I've actually reached
out to uh cab and our Board of Education
lawyer to just for final input um we
discussed it at last week's Board of
Education meeting and hopefully we'll
have something or we will have something
for your M meet uh main meeting and
hopefully before your main meeting we'll
have passed the policy by the Board of
Ed
good good update thank
you anything else from the board on this
topic okay hearing none we can move on
to item 4B which is review of budget to
actual there wasn't actually any
information in our packet no so we
nothing to review my apologies for that
Cheryl was in today working on that so
today would have been the first day we
had uh it fully updated for the month um
so it did not make the packet so my
apologies for that so that would be the
same for the fem 4C check register we
don't have that to review and I don't
know if any of the board members have
any concerns I mean we've got a lot on
our agenda and we're meeting an awful
lot these days so I don't really see a
problem with
uh long as you guys let us know if
there's any serious issues
obviously I'll set all right should we
move on to 4D this is the audit review
and I think the news here is that the
audit findings have uh uh been reviewed
we've accepted the audit and the
corrective actions have been submitted
to the
state that's correct yeah so I think
we're in good shape there I don't know
we have anything else to really discuss
on this
one okay nobody has anything we can move
on to I was just going to say it's great
that we're making progress we're really
happy I know we'll talk about it later
with you know when we had that joint
meeting and the auditor was involved
that it's more positive than not we're
moving in the right direction we're
getting the audit to review a lot
earlier than we have the past two years
um so it's moving in a positive
direction like you said and hopefully
with the final corrective actions and
suggestions like you said that wor
submitted you know maybe even next year
will be will be a lot better you know
and you know keep moving in that
direction I'm optimistic y
okay okay if we have no other discussion
the next item is the approval of the
capital purchase process form again we
haven't I don't know that
we Revisited this I'm gonna share my
screen okay uh we discussed this at the
last meeting at the last right meeting
yeah yeah okay and then there were some
questions raised by several people who
asked for various things to be added
subtracted or clarified So based on that
feedback I'm kind of proposing this as
the form and just to refresh your memory
this will be a form that will be filed
every time we make significant Capital
purchases so that all the paperwork
stays in one place and we when the
auditor asks the next year we don't have
to run around trying to figure out which
meeting it got approved by whom and what
the chain was um it's all there in one
concise spot so I think that does make
sense it was a suggestion by the auditor
um and uh several of your members have
uh given me some good feedback so this
incorporates the feedback that they had
asked
okay very good I it looks good yeah yeah
so and I just want to make a point that
you know this is a is a good form it's I
think it was a good suggestion by the
auditor and it doesn't mean you know
approving this today doesn't mean that
we have to live with this in perpetuity
so we can always just you know Eric can
propose changes and we
can modify it next month if we need to
so but I I think it's probably a good
place to start same have any other
suggestions or
comments anybody want to make a motion
to approve Mark I just had one question
for Eric so once we approve it you'll
even even though you know we're Midway
through a year you'll all just start
using this now right and then just yeah
I've actually already started using the
previous form for Capital purchases but
now if you agree to this one we'll use
this one instead going forward I think
it's a great idea I'd like to make a
motion
to um approve this version of
the capital purchase processing form um
you know as pictured
here Capital purchase approval form
approval form yeah version two I'll
second that bill second do we have any
further
discussion no I do have a quick
question where it says date ordered is
that the item being
ordered correct you're actually
purchased okay
correct got
it
okay other
questions
comments okay I guess we'll call for a
vote all those in favor say I I I I
opposed
any
extensions okay motion passes thank you
very
much okay so we will move on to uh we
don't have any uh new business under
agenda item five since we changed
our our
meeting um agenda item six is approval
of the meeting minutes from the regular
meeting on March
27th and the April 3rd Special budget
meeting in April 10 bu budget meeting
these are separate agenda items we
should probably I guess we could vote on
them
concurrently not sure there's any
problem with that although the problem
is we don't have the minutes in front of
us I did happen to looked for the ones
with the T so I'm okay with those
but you can certainly punt it to next
week and we'll I think we should we
should probably punt it to our next
meeting yep anybody disagree no I like
that idea too
yeah okay we'll take no action then on
those which leaves us to agenda item
seven the budget
discussion so um you know I did I did a
quick review uh in the uh budget hearing
meeting
um obviously uh We've we've gone over
this significantly uh over the last
couple of months
um do we want to go through it line by
line does anybody have any I know Eric
shared the propos or the budget as
discussed out our last meeting uh so we
should all have it but don't know if
anybody wants to review this again or
should we uh put it to bed or do you
want to make changes to
it Mark I was just gonna say I mean last
week I did make several proposals to
different items you know not the the
only one that we made an adjustment or a
change
to um was the salary to the you know to
the director there um you know there
will be some depending on what happens
there I know the benefits could go down
a little there as well again we did I
did bring several motions for a few
reductions here and there that I felt I
wanted to make um they weren't supported
just to bring you up to speed so that's
where we stand with some of the things
that I had and then I want to ask Eric
one question just in case we end up
moving this forward are we confident
Eric and I I understand Bill D rozers
made a great point last week and I I
hope it comes to this in the future and
one of the things we want to talk to the
treasur about it it does seem
unfortunate that Eric has to go through
this and make the changes and we
understand he's not a secretary and
I forgive them for any kind of typos
there but um I just want to make sure do
we feel confident that the salaries that
are in each of the lines for the town
people are correct before we would I
just you
know is that taken is this the
spreadsheet that stayed from last year's
and then whatever percentage raises in
their contracts is what converted to the
next line because it was hard for me a
few of them I had questions on and I
didn't have a Time it's been a busy week
I didn't get to Circle back to all
spreadsheets and
compare so you're referring to the
salary on the employee cost
tab just salary and I I know it's not
going to make a big difference you know
I'm not nickel and diing it I'm just
asking if he feels confident and then
you said Cheryl had looked at it are we
confident that those figures are correct
the ones that rolled over based on the
cells I mean I don't mind I'm going to
go through it myself but
yeah as far as I know I don't know of
any errors in the calculations or what's
in there for employee
salaries and then I guess my other
question too is um and I like that Kathy
D rozers brought up the the insurance
that hike of
40% it's pretty huge I know we talked to
it at the time are we any closer to
getting any final numbers on is that a I
know you sent an explanation saying that
Cheryl felt confident with the figure
we're putting in have we heard from the
collaborative or what or the Consortium
or whatever term they are with any kind
of solid numbers of what the percentage
increase will be yeah I thought that was
confirmed am I remembering that I'm just
making sure those are my minor questions
yeah ER as far as I know that
information is correct
um Cheryl came out with a number that
was slightly different than me um they
differed by about 1% one and a half
percent okay so we went with her number
since it was
lower no I appreciate that I didn't know
if we were going to hear like in a
couple months if they make a decision in
June and they say oh we were wrong you
know we figured this um or that okay if
that's the number that's the number the
only one I think in terms of that
that where I see some uncertainty still
in the budget is uh in our insurance
bill to
kerma um simply
because they won't give us a final
number on how much our our insurance
will increase because we're adding a
town building we're adding a community
center in an additional person so that
will have some effect on it uh and
they're not willing to to calculate kind
of what that is right now um so that's
one and the other thing that there's
there's no full certainty on is murf
because the state has not set the final
compensation rate for murf as far as I
know um I've asked and they haven't made
that decision yet because they
apparently don't have their full
Actuarial data for the previous year uh
yet and Eric following up on that murf
question because I think I remember we
over the percentage was something like
177% or something at one point so were
we a little over was it last year and I
I don't have the numbers in front of me
so we were over last year um but
remember last year was the year the uh
the uh comproller for the state and the
unions partway through the budget year
or after we adopted a budget but before
the year started um came up with a new
contract related to murf which dropped
that rate significantly last year from
what they initially said it would be um
so right now we're using for numbers the
same rate that we had for last year and
what was
that I don't have the spreadsheet up
sorry think
15% um it's in the in it's in the
ballpark of
15% which it had gotten as high as I
think around 18% that's what I'm
remembering 17.9 or something and they
had threatened to make it go quite a bit
higher than that um but then they
didn't yeah so so last year they brought
it down to
15.85% which is what we are uh
estimating for this year
now it's possible that will be higher
but you
know I have no basis for saying whether
it's going to go up or
down thank you Mark I have no problem
Kath Kathy D rozers has her hand up can
we hear from her because I know she has
experience in
that I didn't see it but yep um yeah I
think I guess so it's not really public
discussion time but I don't see a
problem as long as we don't get too
bogged down into things kathen do you
have a something to add no my no my hand
is not up oh I see it on my screen sorry
Kathy yeah I didn't see it never mind
never mind I'm so sorry I at least I
wanted to invite you to speak my bad
it's on my screen
moving Mark could you bring the uh the
spreadsheet up again and just the bottom
where it shows over the past you know
four or five years what the budget has
been each
year uh yep should be seeing this right
so so I have more of a comment than I do
a question and I think actually it was
the uh the mill rate I'm sorry if you
could show the mill
rate so I guess my comment would be in
my opinion this is a very good and
responsible budget
um if you look at the mill rate you know
just a few years ago almost 34% the year
after that almost
36% and then the next year dropped to
32% respectively and then it dropped to
you know 31 and a quarter and now we're
going up less than a quarter so I think
when you look at inflation and
everything hand the way it's rising uh
and the amount of things that we've
added like the new community center and
um you know new positions and things
that nature you're looking at such a
tiny in my opinion 0.55% increase uh
from where we were just a few years ago
this is still a very very good budget
well below what we were paying three
years in a row so um I just wanted to
you know give my support for this budget
I think it's a very well done very
responsible budget and um I'm hopeful
that it will
pass yeah I will just make the comment
that the that I generally I would agree
um but the mill rate is tied to the
property value so the property values
went up quite a bit so the overall
taxation even though the mill rate has
come down in some cases the overall
taxation is still up you know a percent
or so so uh but given inflation and
things and given the additional things
we're trying to get done with the
community center and fund uh some of the
the funds that are you know problematic
I I agree with
you other questions or comments from the
board um I just agree with what you guys
are saying I think it's a good budget
overall um that's Yeah my two cents
looks
good Mark and I'm just gonna add mine I
know that when I look at a budget I
agree with everyone I think we're moving
the town forward we're putting a lot of
money in the funds the funds are growing
um I think we've done a good job too
when you look at this on paper the only
reason that I bring things to the table
or bring things up is I get a little
afraid of and I said it last week I'm
very transparent you know when we're
when we're raising the town
spending which we'll probably agree to
do you know buy a buy six or
$700,000 that's a huge amount of money
that in a few years when the ram budget
goes back up um you know it's going to
be hard to pair that back down but again
that's why we have the the voting the
Democratic Society where I agree a lot
of people want to see us move things
forward so when suggestions are made by
me it was based on just the overall
increase in spending and trying to kind
of pair down a little where we can and
so coming up with maybe some suggestions
because you know it's it's a lot to take
for people on fixed incomes but I agree
I mean with the things that have been
done you know the community center
adding new positions hopefully
streamlining how everybody you know the
positions at the Town Hall and things
like that it's been a a good thing so
it's positive it's just I'm more
cautious when you add to something as
just going in increments but hopefully
if the work keeps getting done and and
things are improving then then it's good
and and the good part is that the town
gets to vote on it but I when I bring up
things it's only because of the 600 or
$700,000 increase in spending and
usually that's a lot in one year but
we're lucky because we're offsetting it
by Ram you know and RAM also gave us
back 120,000 so that would be another ad
of spending on there if we didn't get
the whatever we got back from Ram you
know that's already been deducted but
again that's why we get to vote you know
it was great that I got to bring my
suggestions forward last week and you
know other people weren't in agreement
but I accept that you know I'm going to
still do my job the way I see that bring
things to the table um for the people
that voted me in but I think overall
we've done a good job you know we at
least we've voiced concerns where there
were concerns and um you know I just
want to see if we are going to spend
money they go to the things we really
need if something could wait for another
year but we have like a catastrophe
somewhere then I'd like to see the money
go to the catastrophe that's all thank
you yeah you make a good point I don't
think anything on there was frivolous
but I think you do make a good point for
sure thank you are you guys still seeing
this are you seeing the spreadsheet
spreadsheet spreadsheet now okay
yep other
comments would anybody like to make a
motion that we adopt this as the
proposed budget for the 2024 202
I'll make the motion that we adopt the
budget as submitted and shown here as
our 2420 2024 2025
budget a
second I'll second it that's Brian okay
thank you yes further
discussion okay all the board members in
favor say I I and
oos any
abstentions actually Mark I'm going to
change my I'm gonna abstain from I mean
I know when I've made my I'm gonna
abstain
[Music]
from uh sorry sorry actually I'm gonna
vote no okay it's GNA it's gonna pass
but that's just my okay on it I just
want to make sure I got the votes right
so I've got Bill I've got you as a yes
myself as a yes Kimberly
I'm opposed okay opposed
Louise I'm a yes okay and
Brian did Brian drop
out I thought I heard him say yes but I
don't want to speak for him I think he
did back up in the the waiting room I'll
just read okay let him back in again
there he is there he is he is yeah okay
right you there yeah sorry about that
yeah it's okay I'm in I'm in California
sorry so you're a little lighter there
than on my window so good so we just
wanted to make sure we got the vote
correct you're voting yes yeah yes I'm a
yes okay okay so we have four yes and
two NOS okay motion passes thank you
very much
guys okay
I think there screen sharing is done
correct yeah okay yep I'm no longer
sharing okay may I can if anybody has
any further questions
but okay well does anybody have anything
else to discuss on the
budget okay this is the budget then we
will present at the meeting which I
believe is next Wednesday May 1st
okay very good uh agenda item eight is
the administrator's report Eric do you
have anything to
add uh yeah the thing I wanted to go
over with you it's something we haven't
done in a while is just talk about all
the
grants uh that the town has that are
active currently um and we can decide
you as a board can decide how much of
this you want to show as part of the
budget
discussion um but these are of the
current grants that are active there's
one for senior Transportation costs the
direct Transportation costs it's a
little unclear how much we'll actually
get for that um we know how much we're
eligible for but it depends on how much
funding they have in the actual program
so we're we're ballparking we're going
to get roughly that
$111,000 uh we did just get a new 16
passenger bus from a do Grant um that
was
$133,000 even um the bus is delivered
and it's in service
now uh we received the legislative
direct grant for the connectivity study
that was $100,000 we've spent about a
little more than half of it um I'm
waiting on a proposal to spend the
remaining half uh working on the design
of that project
um we did from that legislative Grant in
the study we submitted a lsip grant uh
to actually fund the construction of the
project that was a 2 point I think it's
$2 2.86 million Grant I just rounded it
up um that did get final approval today
by Capital Regional Council of
governments so uh that money
um it's still going to be a while before
we actually get the money but we have
that Grant so that was a a good success
on the part of the town we have a 2022
steep grant for
$275,000 for the senior Transportation
Hub um again we're we're slowly grinding
through the design and approvals for
that that has been approved at town
meeting and we have agreed to match that
uh to get the grant um as we discussed
last night the Steep grant for the wck
Field improvements that was a $500,000
Grant with
$150,000 Town match that was approved uh
at the town meeting last night that is
in the design stage we met with the uh
our uh engineer from Nathan Jacobson
today myself in the field committee to
continue pushing back the state local
bridge program we did get basically a
$920,000
grant from the state they will fund 50%
of the cost of the uh Bridge Culvert
replacement on Lake
Road um that design is in progress
estimated to begin basically uh a little
over a year from now so that the funding
will cover
because we're adding money to the bridge
and Culvert fund this budget cycle and
next budget cycle and then that will be
the town's total contribution towards
that that particular cul and then we'll
move on to the next one uh the next two
were Federal local bridge program
grants um with what's called design
managed by state which means we got the
state to agree to fund the design
portion um and then an additional
appropriation through investment and
jobs act funding to bring both those
bridges into 100% funding so combined
that's around 8.6 million um in funding
for those two
projects um in terms of smaller grants
we have a grant in right now for the
Department of Homeland Security because
we just had to update our Emergency
Operations plan for the town and because
we successfully filed it uh they will
give a us a reimbursement um for that so
we have that coming in um we're also
just about ready to hit sen on a fairly
small arpa Grant that's specifically for
senior
centers um that will be around $9,000
and again that's money that's been
allocated so having written the grant we
will get that
um I found out yesterday or the day
before we received a do micro Grant uh
to start an ebike program uh um and
that's still somewhat dependent on Final
approval from the board of Selectmen to
allow me to accept that um but in
addition to that the Eastern Highlands
health district has some money from a
Healthy Lifestyles grant that they will
contribute to the project and we're
going to put some additional money into
that from uh some unspent funds in
another Grant from a do connectivity
project um so right now in the hopper we
have about $13.4
million you know in state and federal
grant funding that we've received over
the past few years so we've had a really
successful run at funding um we didn't
get everything um we applied for a trip
grant that was a little over a million
dollar Grant um that one didn't get
funded um we currently have a w Trail
study Grant out there in The Ether um
that we should hear back from in the
next three weeks to a month that was for
about
$83,000 um my guess is were not going to
get it um but it was worth applying for
in case we did
um and the last thing is I submitted uh
to our legislative our you know the
federal legislature for a congressional
appropriation to fund a generator and
also finish the community center uh
fully um under the program we submitted
which was through the department of
agricultural agricultural uh rural
Administration that would fund 75 % of
the work uh we submitted a grant for
about
$410,000 um we should know this fall
whether we got that and if we did that
what that would allow us to do is allow
us to leverage the money that we had
already set aside to finish the
community center and stretch that do a
little bit better job finishing off the
community center and put in the
generator backup for all three buildings
um at the same time so that's pretty
much where we are um frankly I'm done
writing grants for a while um because
it's a pretty big time suck um and I got
other things I got to do um but we've
had a good run at it um I'm happy to
answer any questions related to
that great really nice good summer board
members have questions or
comments I said I said before I told
Eric earlier this is amazing amount of
money uh it's like one year's budget $
13.4 million so great work done by Eric
and everybody that's been involved in
writing these grants um amazing work
thank you I was going to say the same
thing Eric that's highly
commendable very good I appreciate the
explanation being a new board of Finance
member this is wonderful thank you Eric
yeah you're
welcome yeah it it's I'm
actually you know I'm actually a decent
grant writer I don't claim to be awesome
at it um the town planner John gasowski
has been editing the documents for me um
so it's been kind of a collaborative
effort lately on Grant
submissions um but yeah we' we've been
pretty successful with it so so I'm
pretty happy you know and and a lot of
these are kind of long-term projects you
know for me I mean frankly the work for
the route 316 multi-use pathway
connection um I've been plugging away at
that now for nine
years um you know and I was pretty
completely unsuccessful for seven and a
half of those nine years um and in the
last you know year and a half I've been
able to fund the design and the
construction for that so um basically
what I do is I sit on a list in my head
and on paper of all the projects that I
think are worthwhile for the town to do
and then I just keep looking at all the
grants that come up and whenever I see
one that's applicable um you know we go
for it so so we have to as a small town
take care take advantage of any funding
opportunity uh we can absolutely
thank you any other questions related to
the grants yes I had one Eric great job
with all the money all the projects I
know you devote a lot of time to it and
effort and I'm glad that you're the
planner is involved too because I knew
that was one of the things that was told
to us I only want to ask one question
that the only one that bothers me a
little because I worry about
liability and I didn't know it was this
far along but with the ebikes are you
concerned at all you know I don't know
how big of a project it would be but if
we're offering maybe I know you talked
about it through the community center or
whatever and I've been to cities where
they have those bikes available and
different things when you travel
um are we worried at all about the
financial impacts of liability with
accidents or things of that nature
that's the only thing that worries me
about that the all the other ones are
wonderful
but am I worried about it person
no is the board of SEL worried about the
town expenses you know I don't we were
we saw yeah that's
all I mean I think we're a great town
where we have the The Walking I love to
walk the trails the biking and
everything like that personally I wasn't
sure again I'm not reigning on a parade
but we are a financial board I just you
know I just worry about that one a
little bit but I I don't I don't make
the decisions for the town
so Eric Eric you said you weren't
concerned but you were about to say
something about the board of
selectman I said I'm personally not
concerned but um several members of the
board are so that will be a I'm sure a
robust uh discussion before we proceed
the the problem is is that I had a very
short window like seven days to work out
a program and apply for the funding
which I did and I got got it um
so um now the question is will they
actually allow me to implement it and
and that's not a guarantee and they may
pull the plug on it which case you know
we'll just reject the money um which I
hate doing and would annoy me but
ultimately that's their
decision yeah any questions for Eric on
these can question sorry
go ahead Brian oh oh yeah I'll make it
quick sorry Luis um no that's okay um so
that would be on the town insurance
right if somebody was injured on the
bikes I'm
assuming Why Town insurance would that
go on Town Insurance like if somebody
got injured on the bike oh they'll come
after the town if they get injured on an
ebike that the town rented to them a law
I would think so anytime you have an
event in a school building or a town
building or something like that someone
slips on a banana peel someone slips in
water in the cafeteria when they're
going back to
their we face I'm not trying that's the
worries me we would have to find out how
much how much the increase in the
insurance is I guess to go make a better
decision I guess right I mean I think
the first thing is let's let's wait and
see if the board of Selectmen approve it
and then we can certainly talk about it
you yeah is it it may stop there and not
really something we even need to discuss
then so right and and look certainly
I've referred this to kerma um and their
risk management you know Division and
made them fully aware that we were
considering this as a program um the
problem with kerma is their turnaround
to get anything back from their risk
management you know is long
outside the Grant application time frame
so it's not like you can get an idea run
it by them get a response submit a grant
so you know I submitted the Grant and
found out about it long before I ever
got a response from
kerma but sure there is potential
liability concern with that same thing
with allowing you know building new
pickle ball courts there's an enormous
amount of liability now that we've
agreed to build a playground for
children um you know so all of these
things incur some
liability but they're also Community
assets so the question really is is it
worth the potential
liability um or not and that that'll be
for the board to decide
y Eric can that ebike one be redirected
to a a
non-e and make it bike related or do it
have to strictly be
ebike
um could I reject that Grant and write a
different grant for something else I
mean the whole goal of that Grant so
we're
clear is to give people a chance to try
out commuter style ebikes to see whether
they will work out for
transportation this is a do Grant it's
not about Recreation it's not about
going out and having fun riding your bik
on the rail trail it's does this work as
a mode of
transportation so in this case given how
hilly uh Handover is and how out of
shape the average person is um doing it
with a regular bike probably is Not
Practical um anybody that's capable of
riding a regular bike is probably
already riding a regular bike and own
owns one so the utility probably isn't
there um could we run a successful
program by putting the bikes down at say
the library and have a bike loaner
program for people who wanted to ride
recreationally on the rail trail yeah I
think that could be a great program but
that's not something I could have funded
with this
grant okay I think it's a great idea you
know can that be used kind of around the
lake area
absolutely yeah that was a good idea
try
them okay Eric you got anything else to
add for your administrator's portion no
that's
it okay I guess we'll move on to agenda
item nine which is liaison reports I
know Rob is usually our liaison for CIP
and also working with uh the board of ad
on the policy there um does anybody else
have
anything okay we'll move on to agenda
item 10 which is the board open
discussion does anybody have any they
want to bring before the
board Mark were we gonna touch on the uh
successful joint meeting that we had I
mean uh yeah if go ahead and bring that
up it's probably not a bad idea if you
want to give a recap that' be good sure
we ended up meeting um with the auditor
um the vice chair and chair of each of
the board of Finance Board of Ed and um
Board of selectman on Monday April 15th
and Eric was there as well the town
manager um kind of just to go over the
corrective action plan that had been
submitted talk about the audit a little
talk about financial reporting back and
forth um and just you know I know that
it was important to me to have everyone
in the room and to kind of and Cheryl
Miller was in invited as well she wasn't
able to attend she was out of town um
but um just to hear the primary people
that deal with the reports that are
needed um give us feedback you know so
we could hear it
firsthand um so as you can imagine I
won't go into everything that was said
um everyone was allowed to talk about
their side of the story I thought that
was important
um Eric voiced what the um Treasurer
needs in order to maintain the books and
do everything that she needs to do
checking off and I think you know trying
to come up with a good timeline of
receiving some reports from the Board of
Ed again I'm not the expert of all of
this um but it had to do with some of
the things we were cited for on the
audit so we're trying to get a better
system in play um I think both sides
which I think was it was really good
that some people were there so we were
able to say that it was good that we
were able to a why maybe people had been
reluctant to do that in the past um and
just kind of talk about it I think we
came to a good overall understanding at
the end of it was a two-hour meeting
because everyone got to speak their
piece and talk about it um you never
think these meetings are going to go two
hours but they did the auditor was able
to pipe in there and explain different
things that he needed he he voiced his
opinion that he was getting great
cooperation from the town getting
everything he needed from the Board of
Ed but it was more trying to get just
some timely reports so that Cheryl could
put her stamp on whatever needs to be
done for the town from the Board of Ed
so an agreement was reached right Mark
if you want to take it from here I think
Terry yeah I think it's a good summary I
mean basically we we got agreement on
you know what you know made sense for
the uh uh for the treasurer to have on a
monthly basis and and there was some
angst over kind of the timeline and you
know it was the needed monthly or not
but you know it everything we do is just
going to be better than what we have now
and I think there was good agreement
everyone was was uh positive I think
yeah I think that it was a positive
outcome uh for sure for that from that
meeting and uh I think it's absolutely a
basis on which we move forward you know
if this is you know if we follow their
you know this regime I think is going to
uh or regimen is going to uh do what we
need to do and I think we'll be in good
shape any comments or questions beyond
that so I just wanted to add one thing
that I did correct uh and just so Eric
hears that too I put it in an email but
um they had uh the Board of Ed was
sending I don't know if it went to the
full Board of Finance or just Mark and
myself a report you know financial
reporting here and there through the
year they had started putting their
packets together which they've also said
that they include on their Board of Ed
agendas so if anyone needed more
in-depth reporting they can find it on
their Board of Ed agendas I looked back
Mark we hadn't been getting those
reports every month it doesn't matter
it's neither here all about moving
forward but I just want to clear that we
didn't know what exactly Cheryl was
looking for us as the board of EDS sure
we're we're intaking a packet but we're
assuming they're getting it as well but
it was just nice for us all to be in one
room um clear it out good you know
Celeste made a good made good notes
about the exact deliverables right on
everyone's behalf and I think it's gonna
it's going to be a good basis that much
before so everyone can feel good about
that we think we resolved or at least
were able to come together on an
agreement for moving forward what's to
be expected
and the fact that no one I think there
was concern this is important to say to
everyone here like you said with the
timeline the little bit of angst I think
the Board of Ed was afraid if you know
we said we have to have it every 30 days
and if if it was a short month or a
vacation school vacation month or maybe
they didn't get the check register back
on time to
reconcile no one was going to be at
their doorstep on the 31st day being
upset that it wasn't in we're all going
to understand that we get it in a fair
amount of time and just yeah have a
system in place that's
it okay other comments or
questions any other agenda topics for
the Board General
discussion I think just sorry very quick
so obviously we moved the budget forward
the town budget meeting would be May 1st
right which is next Wednesday so we'll
still have another um and all of us go
correct I don't know if we need to talk
about procedure right yeah that's a good
point you know since we' got new member
whoever can make it yeah yeah so
basically assuming you can uh so the
town budget meeting is next week um you
know we generally attend in person as
was mentioned um earlier um
somebody suggested maybe have the board
have that out there it's something that
we haven't normally done because they
have their own workshops and stuff and
the superintendent usually talks on
behalf of the board of that but
generally the board of Selectmen of the
board of Finance um manage the meeting
on behalf of the town uh we make a
presentation on the budget I'm sure most
of you if not all of you have already
seen this in the past um we highlight
the main key points of the budget
explain you know why uh why where is
where it is and try explain any big
differentials that are occurring uh
break out kind of uh between the
different budgets es RAM and and uh the
town's
expenditures um and then basically it's
an open forum and people can make uh
motions they can ask questions and they
can make a motion to change the uh
budget line items um so that's basically
how it's done here um in in most of New
England I think you know the people make
a motion to to decrease or change uh
certain uh line items and the town then
votes or the committee or the people in
the meeting will then vote uh up or down
on those agenda items and eventually
hopefully we have a budget that we can
pass um and then if the budget is
approved at town meeting then it goes to
referendum it's not done yet goes to
referendum and two weeks later or so I
think it's the second Tuesday following
the meeting is the the uh exact timing
uh the town's budget referendum takes
place and people will go to the town and
vote town hall and then if it passes
we're good we are done for the year we
will uh move on and if it doesn't then
we uh go through the process again of
having another recommended budget
so yeah I'll I'll work Eric I'll take
the presentation from last year um I'll
review it I'll update the numbers I'll
send it to you and Joan and like really
the whole board anybody has any comments
suggestions or input you know we can we
can try to modify that I should have
time to do that and get it to you know
hopefully
by hopefully by the end of the day
Saturday i' would say and then I hope we
get some time to provide some
input okay thank you okay Eric do we
know the referendum for Ram yet it's all
are they still backtack days do we know
that
uh give me one second I'll look on the
town clerk's office and tell you what
D sorry I could have looked it up I
didn't know you know there always seems
to be yeah I didn't put that in my
calendar
it's on Town's
website May 7th is the r budget
referendum May 7 okay May 7 thank you we
may want to put that in the town
calendar I don't see it on there just a
thought
[Music]
okay any other uh board
discussion okay hearing none I'll move
on to agenda item 11 which is
correspondence I didn't have any until
we were in the middle of the meeting and
I don't know if any of you saw but
Celeste Celeste Willard did send
something from the Board of Ed um which
we can consider I think at our next
meeting it's not a topic for this for
this meeting it's not on the agenda uh
but it is a request
to move uh
$103,000 I believe it is uh of the AES
Surplus from the 2022 2023 budget year
into the AES Capital funds uh did a
quick calculation um and that's about
2.65% of their of their uh of their
budget for that fiscal year um so that
would be an item that we take up at the
uh next meeting this is something that's
allowed by the state statutes
so any other corresponden or anything we
should
discuss okay hearing none I guess we'll
move on to agenda item 12 which is
public speak we have a few members of
the public Eric do you want to just go
around
conduct sure first one on my screen is
Linda
fish all
set okay
next one up is
Kathleen no comment thank you okay
Shannon
L all set thank you good night and
Leanne
Hutchinson yes um I assume you can see
that I posted the salary range for the
East Hampton senior coordinator position
that was advertised about a month ago in
the chat room that's all it's in the
chat yep yep thank you thanks leam
that's
good okay I guess if we have nothing
else then we will move on to agenda item
13 which is adjournment anybody like to
make a motion to
adjourn I'll make a motion to adjourn
okay Louise I heard you second you have
a second Joanne I see you got your hand
up you're muted
but I muted myself I'll second the
motion to adjourn thank you all right um
any
discussion okay we'll take a vote all
those in favor say I hi hi any
opposed any
extensions okay hearing none the meeting
is adjourned thank you very much
everybody I think we've done a good am
of work here I think we have a good
budget present to the town and we'll um
we'll see how the uh how the uh Town
feels about it at the meeting and we'll
move on from there thanks for all the
hard work have a good weekend thank you
bye everybody cheers